# NRPS-CepA-explanation
   DNA codes for proteins, which are made of amino acids that are added one at a time to the protein by a component called the ribosome.  DNA, proteins, and ribosomes are ubiquitous throughout life, and just as exquisitely tuned as you would expect for something refined over every generation of every living thing ever.  Vancomycin, one of our antibiotics of last resort, is also constructed from a string of amino acids but, to get some features out of it that regular proteins can’t offer, the fungus that makes the drug has kluged together a much less elegant system.  Ribosomes can add any of the standard 20 amino acids to any of the infinite possible proteins; the fungus has to use a different purpose-made protein to catalyze the connection between each of the amino acids in vancomycin.  This non-ribosomal peptide synthesis is interesting for a lot of reasons, not least of which is the constant arms race between antibiotics and pathogens.  

   My contribution to the war effort was to (re)design an expression optimized version of the gene that codes for the protein that catalyzes the first bond in vancomycin synthesis.  Since the original DNA came from a fungus and we use the much more easily grown and manipulated bacteria E. coli in the lab, the first step was to make the adjustments required by the change in operating system.  This mostly involved changing parts of the gene outside the “coding region” that don’t contain instructions for which amino acids go where in the protein, but that serve as recognition signals for cellular machinery that start and stop its transcription and translation into protein by the ribosome.  I also added recognition sites for the enzymes I would later use to introduce the gene into bacteria.  Only then did I start to hack the coding region.

   DNA is a triplet code, in that every three bases of DNA codes for a single amino acid, and also a degenerate code: several different three-base sequences can all code for the same amino acid.  But the triplets that code for the same amino acid aren’t distributed equally, and fungi and bacteria have some differences in which triplets they prefer.  So to maximize the efficiency of my protein’s production I had to alter a good bit of the thousands of bases in the coding region to make it more easily readable by bacterial systems.

   Finally, I used PCR to assemble the newly optimized gene from a collection of 14-base long fragments, adding two fragments per reaction over several hundred reactions, and introduced the final product into the genome of E. coli in the lab.  From there, collaborators began growing the bacteria and isolating the protein it produced to be used in other studies.
